Add 2.6.0 release blog. (#7303)
apache/pulsar: site2/website/blog/2020-06-18-Apache-Pulsar-2-6-0.md

Here is a selection of some of the most interesting and major features added to Pulsar 2.6.0.

<!--truncate-->

## Core Pulsar

### [PIP-37] Large message size support

This PIP adds support for producing and consuming large size messages by splitting the large message into multiple chunks. This is a very powerful feature for sending and consuming very large messages.

Currently, this feature only works for the non-shared subscription and it has client-side changes. You need to upgrade the Pulsar client version to 2.6.0. You can enable the message trunk at the producer side as below.

```java
client.newProducer()
	.topic("my-topic")
	.enableChunking(true)
	.create();
```

For more information about PIP-37, see [here](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/wiki/PIP-37:-Large-message-size-handling-in-Pulsar). <br> For more information about implementation details, see [PR-4440](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/4400).

### [PIP-39] Namespace change events (system topic)

> This PIP introduces the system topic to store namespace change events. Previously, Pulsar only allowed you to set the namespace policy, all topics under the namespace followed the namespace policy. Many users want to set the policy for topics. The main reason for not using the same way as namespace level policy is avoiding introducing more workload on ZooKeeper. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PIP introduces the system topic to store namespace change events. Previously, Pulsar only allowed you to set the namespace policy, all topics under the namespace followed the namespace policy. Many users want to set the policy for topics. The main reason for not using the same way as namespace level policy is to avoid introducing more workload on the ZooKeeper. 
```

> The original intention of the system topic is able to store topic policy in a topic rather than ZooKeeper. So this is the first step to achieve topic level policy. And we can easily add support for the topic level policy with this feature.

Reviewer 2: system topic is **to be** able to

For more information about PIP-39, see [here](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/wiki/PIP-39%3A-Namespace-Change-Events).<br> For more information about implementation details, see  [PR-4955](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/4955).

### [PIP-45] Pluggable metadata interface

We have been advancing to enable Pulsar to use other metastore services rather than ZooKeeper. This PIP converts `ManagedLedger` to use the `MetadataStore` interface. This facilitates the metadata server plug-in process. Through the `MetadataStore` interface, it is easy to add other metadata servers into Pulsar such as [etcd](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd).

For more information about PIP-45, see [here](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/wiki/PIP-45%3A-Pluggable-metadata-interface). <br> For more information about implementation details, see [PR-5358](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/5358).

> ### [PIP 53] Contribute DotPulsar to Apache Pulsar

Reviewer 3: I don't think we need to add this. Because it is not released as part of 2.6.0.

Author: ok

Previously, there were no official client libraries for .NET To optimize developer experience and performance. Consequently, a client library in C# for .NET - [DotPulsar](https://github.com/apache/pulsar-dotpulsar) has been developed. 

> For more information about PIP-53, see [here](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/wiki/PIP-53:-Contribute-DotPulsar-to-Apache-Pulsar)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about PIP-53, see [here](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/wiki/PIP-53:-Contribute-DotPulsar-to-Apache-Pulsar).
```

Author: PIP 53 removed from 2.6.0

```
advertisedListeners=internal:pulsar://192.168.1.11:6660,external:pulsar://110.95.234.50:6650
```

From the client side, you can specify the listener name for the client as below.

```java
PulsarClient.builder()
    .serviceUrl(url)
    .listenerName("internal")
    .build();
```

For more information about PIP-61, see [here](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/wiki/PIP-61%3A-Advertised-multiple-addresses). <br> For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6903](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6903).

### [PIP-65] Adapt Pulsar IO sources to support `BatchSources`  

This PIP introduces `BatchSource` as a new interface for writing batch-based connectors. It also introduces `BatchSourceTriggerer` as an interface to trigger the data collection of a `BatchSource`. It then provides system implementation in `BatchSourceExecutor`.

For more information about PIP-65, see [here](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/wiki/PIP-65%3A-Adapting-Pulsar-IO-Sources-to-support-Batch-Sources). <br> For more information about implementation details, see [PR-7090](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/7090).

### [Load balancer] Add `ThresholdShedder` strategy for the load balancer

> The `ThresholdShedder` strategy is more flexible than ` LoadSheddingStrategy` for Pulsar. The `ThresholdShedder` calculates the average resource usage of the brokers, and individual broker resource usage compares with the average value. If it is greater than the average value plus threshold, the overload shedder is triggered. You can enable it in `broker.conf` as below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ThresholdShedder` strategy is more flexible than `LoadSheddingStrategy` for Pulsar. The `ThresholdShedder` calculates the average resource usage of the brokers, and individual broker resource usage compares with the average value. If it is greater than the average value plus threshold, the overload shedder is triggered. You can enable it in `broker.conf` as below.
```

```

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-5985](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/5985).

### Support deleting inactive topics when subscriptions are caught up

Previously, Pulsar supported deleting inactive topics which do not have active producers and subscriptions. This PR supports deleting inactive topics when all subscriptions of the topic are caught up and when there are no active producers or consumers. This PR exposes inactive topic delete mode in `broker.conf`. In the future, we can support a namespace level configuration for the inactive topic delete mode.

```
# Set the inactive topic delete mode. Default is delete_when_no_subscriptions
# 'delete_when_no_subscriptions' mode only delete the topic which has no subscriptions and no active producers
# 'delete_when_subscriptions_caught_up' mode only delete the topic that all subscriptions has no backlogs(caught up)
# and no active producers/consumers
brokerDeleteInactiveTopicsMode=delete_when_no_subscriptions
```

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6077](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6077).

### Add a flag to skip broker shutdown on transient OOM

> A high dispatch rate on one of the topics may cause a broker to go OOM  temporarily. It is a transient error and the broker can recover within a few seconds as soon as some memory gets released. However, in 2.4 release ([#4196](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/4196)), the “restarted broker on OOM” feature can cause huge instability in a cluster, where a topic moves from one broker to another and restarts multiple brokers and disrupt other topics as well. So this PR provides a dynamic flag to skip broker shutdown on OOM to avoid instability in a cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A high dispatch rate on one of the topics may cause a broker to go OOM temporarily. It is a transient error and the broker can recover within a few seconds as soon as some memory gets released. However, in 2.4 release ([#4196](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/4196)), the “restarted broker on OOM” feature can cause huge instability in a cluster, where a topic moves from one broker to another and restarts multiple brokers and disrupts other topics as well. So this PR provides a dynamic flag to skip broker shutdown on OOM to avoid instability in a cluster.
```

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6634](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6634).

### Make ZooKeeper cache expiry time configurable

> Previously, ZooKeeper cache expiry time was hardcoded and it needed to be configurable to refresh value based on various requirements, for example, refreshing value quickly in case of zk-watch miss, avoiding frequent cache refresh to avoid zk-read or avoiding issue due to zk read timeout, and so on. Now you can configure ZooKeeper cache expiry time in `broker.conf` as below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, ZooKeeper cache expiry time was hardcoded and it needed to be configurable to refresh the value based on various requirements, for example, refreshing the value quickly in case of zk-watch miss, avoiding frequent cache refresh to avoid zk-read or avoiding issue due to zk read timeout, and so on. Now you can configure ZooKeeper cache expiry time in `broker.conf` as below.
```

```
# ZooKeeper cache expiry time in seconds
zooKeeperCacheExpirySeconds=300
```

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6668](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6668).

### Optimize consumer fetch messages in case of batch message

> When a consumer sends a fetch request to a broker server, it contains a fetch message number telling the server how many messages should be pushed to a consumer client. However, the broker server stores data in BookKeeper or broker cache according to entry rather than a single message if the producer produces messages using the batch feature. There is a gap to map the number of messages to the number of entries when dealing with consumer fetch requests. This PR adds a variable `avgMessagesPerEntry` to record average messages stored in one entry. It updates when a broker server pushes messages to a consumer. When dealing with consumer fetch requests, it maps fetch request number to entry number. Additionally, this PR exposes the `avgMessagePerEntry` static value to consumer stat metric json.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a consumer sends a fetch request to a broker server, it contains a fetch message number telling the server how many messages should be pushed to the consumer. However, the broker server stores data in BookKeeper or the broker cache according to entry rather than a single message if the producer produces messages using the batch feature. There is a gap to map the number of messages to the number of entries when dealing with the consumer's fetch requests. This PR adds a variable `avgMessagesPerEntry` to record average messages stored in one entry. It updates when a broker server pushes messages to a consumer. When dealing with a consumer's fetch requests, it maps fetch request number to entry number. Additionally, this PR exposes the `avgMessagePerEntry` static value to consumer stat metric json.
```

```
# Precise dispatcher flow control according to history message number of each entry
preciseDispatcherFlowControl=false
```

For more information about implementation details, see  [PR-6719](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6719)

### Introduce precise topic publish rate limiting

Previously, Pulsar supported the publish rate limiting but it is not a precise control. Now, for some use cases that need precise control, you can enable it in `broker.conf` as below.

```
preciseTopicPublishRateLimiterEnable=true
```

For more information about implementation details, see  [PR-7078](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/7078).

### Expose check delay of new entries in `broker.conf`

Previously, the check delay of new entries was 10 ms and could not be changed by users. Currently, for consumption latency sensitive scenarios, you can set the value of check delay of new entries to a smaller value or 0 in `broker.conf` as below. Using a smaller value may degrade consumption throughput. 

```
managedLedgerNewEntriesCheckDelayInMillis=10
```

For more information about implementation details, see  [PR-7154](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/7154).

> ### [Schema]  Supports `null` key and `null` value in KeyValue schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### [Schema]  Support `null` key and `null` value in KeyValue schema
```
As there is no detailed info about this feature improvement, i suggest to remove it because users can also get the info through the release note.

### Support triggering ledger rollover when `maxLedgerRolloverTimeMinutes` is met

This PR implements a monitoring thread to check if the current topic ledger meets the constraint of `managedLedgerMaxLedgerRolloverTimeMinutes` and triggers a rollover to make the configuration take effect. Another important idea is that if you trigger a rollover, you can close the current ledger so that you can release the storage of the current ledger. For some less commonly used topics, the current ledger data is likely to be expired and the current rollover logic is only triggered when adding a new entry. Obviously, this results in a waste of disk space. The monitoring thread is scheduled at a fixed time interval and the interval is set to `managedLedgerMaxLedgerRolloverTimeMinutes`. Each inspection makes two judgments at the same time, for example, `currentLedgerEntries > 0` and `currentLedgerIsFull()`. When the number of current entries is equal to 0, it does not trigger a new rollover and you can use this to reduce the ledger creation.

For more information about implementation details, see  [PR-7116](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/7111).

> # Proxy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Proxy
```

### Add REST API to get connection and topic stats

Previously, Pulsar proxy did not have useful stats to get internal information about the proxy. It is better to have internal-stats of proxy to get information, such as live connections, topic stats (with higher logging level), and so on. This PR adds REST API to get stats for connection and topics served by proxy.

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6473](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6473).

> # Admin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Admin
```

### Support getting a message by message ID in pulsar-admin

This PR adds a new command `get-message-by-id` to the pulsar-admin. It allows users to check a single message by providing ledger ID and entry ID. 

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6331](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6331).

### Support deleting subscriptions forcefully

This PR adds the method `deleteForcefully` to support force deleting subscriptions. 

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6383](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6383).

> # Functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Functions
```

### Built-in functions

This PR implements the possibility of creating built-in functions in the same way as adding built-in connectors.

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6895](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6895).

> ### Add Go Function heartbeat (and gRPC service) for production usage

Reviewer: I suggest to remove this because no detailed info is provided. User can got this info through release note.

 
For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6031](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6031).

### Add custom property options to functions

This PR allows users to set custom system properties while submitting functions. This can be used to pass credentials via a system property.

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6348](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6348).

> ### Separate TLS configurations of function worker and broker

Reviewer: same as above

 
For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6602](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6602).

### Add the ability to build consumers in functions and sources

Previously, function and source context give their writers an ability to create publishers but not consumers. This PR fixes this issue.

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6954](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6954).

> # Pulsar SQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pulsar SQL
```

### Support KeyValue schema

Previously, Pulsar SQL could not read the KeyValue schema data.

This PR adds KeyValue schema support for Pulsar SQL. It adds the prefix `key.` for the key field name and `value.` for the value field name.

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6325](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6325).

### Support multiple Avro schema versions

> Previously, if you have multiple Avro schema versions for a topic, use Pulsar SQL to query data from this topic will introduce some problems. With this change, You can evolve the schema of the topic and keep transitive backward compatibility of all schemas of the topic if you want to query data from this topic. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, if you have multiple Avro schema versions for a topic, using the Pulsar SQL to query data from this topic will introduce some problems. With this change, You can evolve the schema of the topic and keep transitive backward compatibility of all schemas of the topic if you want to query data from this topic. 
```

  
For more information about implementation details, see [PR-4847](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/4847).

> # Java client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Java client
```

### Support waiting for inflight messages while closing a producer

> Previously, when you closed a producer, pulsar-client immediately failed inflight messages even if they persisted successfully at the broker. Most of the time, users want to wait for those inflight messages rather than fail them. While pulsar-client lib did not provide a way to wait for inflight messages before closing the producer. This PR supports closing API with the flag where you can control waiting for inflight messages. With this change, you can close a producer by waiting for inflight messages and pulsar-client does not fail those messages immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, when you closed a producer, the pulsar-client immediately failed inflight messages even if it persisted successfully at the broker. Most of the time, users want to wait for those inflight messages rather than fail them. While the pulsar-client library did not provide a way to wait for inflight messages before closing the producer. This PR supports closing API with a flag where you can control waiting for inflight messages. With this change, you can close a producer by waiting for inflight messages and the pulsar-client does not fail those messages immediately.
```

For more information about implementation details, see [PR-6648](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/6648).

### Support loading TLS certs/key dynamically from input stream

> Previously, pulsar-client provided TLS authentication support and default TLS provider `AuthenticationTls` expects file path of cert and key files. However, there were use cases where it was difficult for user applications to store certs/key files locally for TLS authentication. This PR adds stream support in `AuthenticationTls` to provide X509Certs and PrivateKey which also performs auto-refresh when streaming changes in a given provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, the pulsar-client provided TLS authentication support and the default TLS provider `AuthenticationTls` expected file path of cert and key files. However, there were use cases where it was difficult for user applications to store certs/key files locally for TLS authentication. This PR adds stream support in `AuthenticationTls` to provide X509Certs and PrivateKey which also perform auto-refresh when streaming changes in a given provider.
```
